# Project Management for Solving Problems

## Outline

* Trust the process
  * Values
  * Vision
  * Mission
  * Strategy
  * Goal setting (OKRs)
  * Understanding opportunities (A3s)
  * Projects (this article)
  * Work (Kanban)
  * Quality (Andon)
  * Process Improvement (Kaizen)

* Goals of the process
  * Leverage the creativity of the participants
  *

When the shit hits the fan you do what you rehearsed. - Daniel Stein
So trust the process, improve it, and rehearse it so that when the
shit hits the fan, making it through the crisis is second nature.

* Products need projects
  * Constraints to triage against
    * These constraints are like the cooling schedule of
      annealing. Too loose, and we have time to do too much, we'll end
      up doing unimportant work. Too strict and we will be forced to
      cut corners.
  * To enable business strategy and planning

* Slack lets variable work flow consistently

* You can have either strict deadlines or strict scope
  * Strategies for achieving a goal on time
    * Commit to either a deadline or a scope but not both
    * When sticking to a scope, report velocity and get through it
      Kanban style
    * When sticking to a deadline, understand the goal you have
      committed to achiving and evaluate the planned scope regularly
      and frequently to ensure first that the goal is met to some
      minimal standard, and second that the remainder of the time
      available is used to perform only the higher value improvements
      to the minimal standard

* Have domain teams and project teams
  * the goals of a domain team is to foster and create domain expertise
    * Training, Toolmaking, Study, Research (primary and secondary)
    * Mantinance and operations
  * the goals of a project team is to achieve a project goal on time
    and under budget

* Create project teams from the right disciplines for the duration of
  the project
  * Have clear project roles for each team member


Projects should have a strict deadline far enough out in the future to
nearly guarantee achievement of a minimum viable "technically"
achievement of the goal, with plenty of time to make plenty of
improvements or try plenty of alternatives through set based
development. Enough time to have the flexibility to find a great
solution. Three months is a good starting point and default for
project timelines.

Something I've noticed, a common challenge, about deadlines and triage
is a discomfort with reducing scope. In theatre, and other artistic
fields, one often hears "Kill your darlings". We form a vision of what
we wanted to acomplish (scope) and we tend to become attached to that
definition of success rather than the less concrete achievement of the
project goal. However it is the achievement of the project goal that
matters more than any specific scope that may achieve it. Especially
considering that the specific scope in our heads is very likely to
take far longer than the deadline we've committed to. This scope was
also written at the time that we knew the least we ever would again
about the project. A better approach, but one that requires comfort
with uncertanty, is to lazily evaluate the project plan, to kill our
darlings and find better directions given new understandings of the
particulars of the project context as we wade through execution of the
project.

The radical claim

We confidently prioritize highest business value work and make high
integrity date commitments with this process outlined below. It
reduces priority shift churn, lets everyone know the business value of
their work and achieves project goals on time and under budget
consistently.


## Goals
First understand the higher order goals a project is
supporting. Then investigate and clarify the relevant current
conditions, goals, and outcomes that support those higher order goals.


## Appetite
Decide with team leadership and the stakeholders of those higher order
goals what your appetite for the project is. Ones appetite for a
project is the budget in time, resources, capacity, risk, and so on
they are willing to bet on the project.


## Management
There are four variables a project team can manipulate in order to
affect the project outcomes. These are capacity, quality of work,
scope, and deadline. Manipulating capacity, hiring new team members
for instance, helps in the long term, but not in the short term. A
high quality of work is non-negotiable. Therefor we are left with the
task of manipulating deadlines and scope in ways that consistently
meet and exceed project goals.

In the large, at the project level, hold strict deadlines but allow
for flexibility in what stories end up being included in the
project. Set project goals that can be both reliably achieved and
valuably exceeded depending on how the scope adjustments shake out
when the project plan collides with reality.

In the small, at the story level, deadlines are flexible but scope is
strict. Do now allow a partial story or a partial solution, and do not
set strict deadlines for the completion of a story. Do however keep
the stories small enough to leverage the law of averages to smooth out
estimate variability and aim to plan work that achieves project goals
early in the timeline, and can then be incrementally improved upon for
the remainder of the project.

Schedule project planning meetings weekly for the entire duration of
the project. Invite stakeholders and those involved in interdependent
projects. Identify and give internal deadlines to any key coordination
points between projects. Continue to refine the planned work to keep
up with changing realities respecting what has already been achieved
in the project. Reprioritize, refine, drop, and create work in order
to optimize the outcomes according to the goal in the remainder of the
time. While there are times that do require changing of deadlines or
modification of goals, try hard not to change the goals or deadline of
a project.

Let the constraints of deadlines and limited resources drive
creativity and the selection of only the highest business value work.

Work
Project document and Epic Lifecycle:
Requirements: Goals and outcomes are written, cross team dependencies
are worked out, timing is considered. An initial set of stories are
created and attached, requirements for these are written. These
stories should not be considered complete or comprehensive but should
represent the core outcomes.

Refinement: Delivery teams are introduced to the project goals and
plan. They refine, split, expand on the stories therein. They may
split off child epics with their own goals, outcomes, coordination
points, and deadlines. They confirm and coordinate with any cross-team
dependent epics or stories. Identify the set of stakeholders who
should be invited to the regular planning meetings once the project is
in progress.

In Progress: Plans are things that change. Continuously refine
projects throughout their execution in regularly scheduled planning
meetings. Continue to refine the scope of the project as work and time
uncovers the differences between the plan and reality, and as business
priorities and realities change. Work hard to maintain the deadline as
changing project deadlines can affect external plans. Ruthlessly
uncover and remove unnecessary scope, according to the project goals
and changing realities, to make time for what’s truly valuable.

Any new work added to a project in progress must be evaluated in terms
of the existing scope it pushes out of the project, or its effect on
the deadline. Prefer identifying and removing lower value work from
the project scope to extending the deadline.

In Review: Hold a project retrospective, document what went well and
what didn’t. Look for opportunities to improve the process. Consider
business opportunities that have opened up due to the result of the
project, consider alternate applications of the achievements or
lessons from this project.


Terms
Project: A goal, a budget/appetite (time, resources), and the
documents, communication, and work directed to achieve the goal, on
time, and under budget.


Objective: A concrete, tangible, qualitative, inspirational aspiration
that can confidently be achieved by a team in a timeframe.


Key Result: A concrete, tangible, quantitative, achievable result that
measures the achievement of some goal


Project goals, objectives, outcomes, and results are written for a
stakeholder audience. They are conservative in order to allow for high
integrity date based commitments to be made and trust to be built.


Stretch Goal or Objective: A specific difficult, but not impossible to
achieve goal set by a team or individual to reach for what they can
achieve


Key Outcome or Result: A quantitative result that is difficult but not
impossible to achieve within the objective timeframe


Stretch goals, objectives, outcomes, and results are written by teams
and individuals for themselves. They are aggressive or radical in
order to push for the author's potential height of achievement of the
project goals, objectives, outcomes, and results.


Regular Planning Meetings
Hold regular project planning meetings weekly to continuously plan
projects in progress.


Attendees: PMs, Stakeholders, and Key team members of a set of
dependent projects.


Agenda:

Update the group on progress, challenges, and any risks that have come up

Reprioritize or replan where necessary

Coordinate any research, planning, problem solving work that is needed
but outside the scope of the meeting.


Prepare updates for the owner of the higher order objectives this rolls up to

Enough prioritization for delivery teams to get a view of the current
project and work priority and plan sprints


